1691:::Mexico:::Sor Juana Inés de la Cruz:::Following criticism for studying secular texts, celebrated writer and nun Sor Juana Inés de la Cruz of Mexico memorably defended women’s rights to education in 1691 by proclaiming “one can perfectly well philosophize while cooking supper." A national icon, today she appears on Mexican currency.
1860:::Russia:::Anna Filosofova:::Ahead of her time, prominent women’s rights activist and Russian philanthropist Anna Filosofova believed it was better to educate and train the poor rather than provide cash benefits. In 1860, she co-founded a society to provide support to the poor, including not only affordable housing but also decent work for women.
1893:::New Zealand:::Kate Sheppard:::New Zealand’s most celebrated suffragist, Kate Sheppard along with fellow campaigners presented a “monster” petition to Parliament demanding women’s suffrage with nearly 32,000 signatures — an instrumental move that led to New Zealand becoming the first self-governing country to grant national voting rights to women in 1893.
1911:::Japan:::Raichō Hiratsuka:::A pioneering Japanese editor, writer and political activist, Raichō Hiratsuka co-founded her country’s first all-women run literary journal Seitō in 1911 through which she challenged women’s traditional roles at home. In the magazine’s inaugural issue, she emboldens women to “reveal the genius hidden within us!"
1951:::Egypt:::Doria Shafik:::Doria Shafik catalyzed a women’s rights movement in Egypt when in 1951 she, alongside 1,500 women, stormed parliament demanding full political rights, pay equality and reforms to personal status laws. These efforts, along with countless others to come, helped pave the way to women’s right to vote in 1956.
1951:::United Kingdom:::Rosalind Franklin:::In 1951, British chemist Rosalind Franklin paved the way for the discovery of DNA’s double-helix structure through the revolutionary use of X-ray diffraction. Franklin captured the critical photo evidence through 100 hours of extremely fine beam X-ray exposure from a machine she had refined.
1960:::Guatemala:::Rigoberta Menchú:::The first indigenous person to win the Nobel Peace Prize, Rigoberta Menchú campaigned for social justice, ethno-cultural reconciliation and indigenous peoples’ rights during and after Guatemala’s Civil War (1960–1996). In 2006, she co-founded the Nobel Women's Initiative to magnify women’s work on peace, justice and equality.
1973:::USA:::Billie Jean King:::A pioneering American tennis champion and social change activist, Billie Jean King famously threatened to boycott the U.S. Open in 1973 unless women were given equal prize money — a demand that was met, making the U.S. Open the first major tournament of its kind to offer pay equality.
1992:::Botswana:::Unity Dow:::As a plaintiff, Unity Dow won a historic case in 1992 enabling women married to non-citizens the right to confer nationality to their children. Later, as Botswana's first female High Court judge, she gained international acclaim on a case that allowed Botswana’s San people to return to their ancestral homelands.
1990:::India:::Vandana Shive:::A staunch environmentalist, Vandana Shiva formed Navdanya in India during the early 1990s to conserve unique strains of seed crops and to educate farmers on eco-diversity. Under Navdanya, she also created a programme on biodiversity, food and water, which empowers women in protecting the livelihoods of their communities.
2016:::Zimbabwe:::Loveness Mudzuru & Ruvimbo Tsopodzi:::Taking their government to court on child marriage, former child brides Loveness Mudzuru and Ruvimbo Tsopodzi made history in 2016 when Zimbabwe’s Constitutional Court ruled in their favour stating that nobody in the country may enter into marriage, including customary law unions, before the age of 18.
1849:::USA:::Elizabeth Blackwell:::Elizabeth Blackwell becomes the first woman to graduate from medical school and become a doctor in the United States.
1955:::USA:::Rosa Parks:::Black seamstress Rosa Parks refuses to give up her seat to a white man on a bus in Montgomery, Ala. The move helps launch the civil rights movement.
1983:::USA:::Sally Ride:::Flying on the Space Shuttle Challenger, Sally Ride becomes the first American woman in space.
2016:::USA:::Hillary Clinton:::Hillary Clinton becomes the first woman to receive a presidential nomination from a major political party. During her speech at the Democratic National Convention, she says, “Standing here as my mother's daughter, and my daughter's mother, I'm so happy this day has come.”
2020:::USA:::Kamala Harris:::Days after the 2020 presidential election, major news outlets project that Kamala Harris has become the first woman and first woman of color to be elected vice president of the United States. "While I may be the first woman in this office, I will not be the last," Harris said in her victory speech.
